# 12. Appendix B: Database Administration and Maintenance

APPENDIX B: Database administration and maintenance

The most common tasks of relational database administration are as follows.

- Database file management

- Maintaining database performance—solving issues like file fragmentation and re-computing table statistics

- User and security management i.e. login roles, privileges, policies, and database encryption

- Implementing a backup strategy

- Configuring alerts for critical conditions

These elements may be implemented separately, or they may be combined in a single database maintenance plan.

## Database files

Each SQL Server database must have at least two files associated with it, one containing the database objects (mdf file) and the other containing the transaction log (ldf file). It is the log file that is most critical with respect to failover recovery, so this file should be stored on redundant media, e.g. on a RAID array.

In order to avoid fragmentation, the files are best placed on volumes that no other programs use. The initial size of the database can be estimated based on the planned application. Too small amounts of auto-grow may also lead to fragmentation. In order to check database integrity it is a good practice to run DBCC CHECKDB ('DB_name') WITH NO_INFOMSGS, ALL_ERRORMSGS, as often as a full backup is created. Any output means a corruption of the database.

## Database performance

```sql
Select the right recovery mode. Use the Full mode only if it is really needed by the application. Make
sure that the following database options are set:
```

- Auto update statistics = TRUE

- Auto create statistics = TRUE

- Auto shrink = FALSE (if possible, do not use table or database shrinking at all)

- Page verify = CHECKSUM

Tuning a database for an application is beyond the scope of this course.

## Backups

In a client-server database application, we use the write-ahead transaction log to tackle data loss situations. There are 3 types of errors for which we should be prepared: 1. The connection to the client is lost. -> We use the log to roll back all uncommitted transactions

restarts, it first rolls forward those transaction steps from the transaction log for which the relevant data pages were not flushed to the data files, then it rolls back all uncommitted transactions 3. The data file is lost -> backup the transaction log, use the previous full and differential backups and then the log backup to restore the database, then roll back all uncommitted transactions Taking regular backups is a common way to prepare for disaster recovery. Backup files are to be stored on media different form that of the database data and log files. The three most common strategies: #1. The minimum: use full backups in SIMPLE recovery mode55, e.g. on a daily basis in off-load periods. The backups should be stored and re-written in a round-robin fashion e.g. over a weekly period. In this way the data loss can be limited to one day. It is a good practice to include in the backup also the master, model and msdb databases as well. #2. Use full backups and differential backups in SIMPLE recovery mode, e.g. a daily full backup and differential backups every 2 hours. In this way the data loss can be limited to 2 hours. #3. If the application requires that the possibility of data loss be minimized, the database must be set to FULL recovery mode and the second strategy must be combined with transaction log backups. Full recovery mode means that without backups, the log may grow substantially. An example strategy is a daily full backup, differential backups every 2 hours, and a transaction log backup every 20 minutes. If the data file is lost, all the committed transactions will be preserved. Backups can be performed in the form of BACKUP DATABASE/RESTORE DATABASE SQL statements like this56: USE [master] RESTORE DATABASE [northwind] FROM DISK = N'C:\Program Files\Microsoft SQL Server\MSSQL14.PRIM\MSSQL\Backup\nw' WITH FILE = 1, NOUNLOAD, REPLACE, STATS = 5 PRACTICE: We simulate a disk error. We create a full backup of the Northwind database in a file device, stop the SQL Server PRIM service, delete the database file, start the service again and restore from backup, using the WITH REPLACE option. Check the contents. For a regular backup, an option is to execute the BACKUP SQL statement in a scheduled job that we prepare manually. Alternatively, backup jobs can be integrated in a database maintenance plan.

## Maintenance plans

Before the plan can be created, we must enable the use of extended stored procedures for SQL Server agent:

```sql
use master
sp_configure 'show advanced options', 1
go
reconfigure
go
sp_configure 'Agent XPs', 1
go
reconfigure
go
```

PRACTICE: Implement the backup strategy #1 in a new maintenance plan for a new test database by setting the schedule to every 2 minutes (for demo purposes). Also include index re-computing and

The simple recovery mode means that he inactive parts of the log are regularly truncated. SQL Scripts can be generated from each dialog panel of SSMS.

integrity checking as tasks to be executed on a daily basis. Use Management -> Maintenance plans. Do not use the wizard. We set the 2-minute recurring interval only for demo purposes.

Check that the backups are generated every 2 minutes.

We cannot test the cleanup task because we cannot set a delete age less than a day. PRACTICE: We implement the backup strategy #3 in a new maintenance plan for the Northwind database:

## Alerts

It is a good practice to set up an alert for all severity 24 errors. Another classic critical condition is when the volume holding the database files is running low on free space. PRACTICE: In this demo, we set up an alert that fires when the size of the Northwind database hits 150% of the current size. First we check the current size of the database in C:\Program Files\Microsoft SQL Server\MSSQL14.PRIM\MSSQL\DATA folder: 8.2 MB. If the size is considerably larger, we first set the recovery mode to simple and then shrink the database i.e. free unused space, leaving 10%:

```sql
use master
```

dbcc shrinkdatabase(northwind, 10)

The process to set up the alert has 4 steps: 1. Set up a database mail profile 2. Enable the mail profile in SQL server agent that will run the alert

4. Create and test the alert

## Setting up database mail

```sql
Select Server -> Management node -> Database mail ->Configure Database mail, then in the New
profile panel, type prim_mail for profile name, then click Add SMTP account. Enter the name of our
SMTP server.
```

Then you must specify the name of the new mail profile that will use the SMTP account:

By making the profile public, every user can use it for sending emails:

Verify that the profile works by selecting Database mail -> Send test E-mail. Check that the email is received as expected:

## Enabling the mail profile in SQL server agent

```sql
Select Properties from the SQL server agent node popup menu:
```

## Creating an operator

```sql
Select Operators from the SQL server agent node and add a new operator. In the ‘E-mail name’ text
box enter your own email address.
```

## Adding the alert

```sql
Select Alerts from the SQL server agent node and add a new alert:
```

Set the response to Notify operator (NW system administrator) by email:

In the Options tab, add a custom message. Set the delay to 1 minute. We use this setting only for demo purposes. Note: If you set the Delay between responses to 0, the response will be repeated continuously as long as the alert condition is satisfied.

Test the alert with the following script. select

object_name(object_id) as 'tablename', count(*) as 'totalpages', sum(Case when is_allocated=0 then 1 else 0 end) as 'unusedPages', sum(Case when is_allocated=1 then 1 else 0 end) as 'usedPages' from sys.dm_db_database_page_allocations(db_id(),null,null,null,'DETAILED') group by object_name(object_id)

```sql
--we will create a big table
go
create table big_table (a char(4000))
declare @i int=0
while @i<1000 begin
insert big_table values ('a')
set @i=@i+1
end
--big_table has 500 pages -> alert is fired
```

Check the alert history and your mailbox. The alert mails are coming repeatedly. Do not forget to drop the big_table and disable or delete the alert.

## Overview of principals, privileges, schemas, roles

Overview of server logins vs. database users as principals. The login is linked to database users and it normally has a default database.

```sql
use master
create login nw_user with password='...', default_database=northwind
use northwind –context switch
create user nw_user for login nw_user
alter role db_datareader add member nw_user
```

PRACTICE: create a new database, a new login and a new database user Overview of privileges, GRANT [which privilege] ON [which object] TO [whom], REVOKE, DENY.

```sql
use northwind
alter role db_datareader drop member nw_user
go
create procedure sp_list_employees
@city varchar(50) = 'London' –default value for the parameter
as
select * from Employees where City=@city
go
exec sp_list_employees
go
exec sp_list_employees 'Seattle'
go
grant execute on sp_list_employees to nw_user
go
```

Roles are groups of privileges, like read access to all tables. Important server level roles: public, dbcreator, serveradmin, sysadmin Important database level roles: db_owner, db_datareader, db_datawriter, negative roles: db_denydatawriter, db_denydatareader

```sql
use adworks
alter role exec_all_sp drop member nw_user
alter role db_owner add member nw_user
alter role db_denydatawriter add member nw_user
--check in a nw_user client connection:
use adworks
select * from Sales.Store
--(701 rows affected)
exec Person.sp_DeletePerson_Temporal 2
--(1 row affected)
--(1 row affected)
create table test (id int)
--Commands completed successfully.
insert test (id) values (25)
--Msg 229, Level 14, State 5, Line 10
--The INSERT permission was denied on the object 'test', database 'adworks', schema
'dbo'.
drop table test
--Commands completed successfully.
```

You can also create your own roles.

```sql
use northwind
revoke execute on sp_list_employees from nw_user
go
--this is how to grant execute for ALL objects of the database
```

grant execute to nw_user

```sql
--check in a client connection
--a new role
use adworks
create role exec_all_sp
grant execute on schema::Person to exec_all_sp--the role acts like a principal
--could also be: grant select, update on schema::Person to read_update_only_role etc.
create user nw_user for login nw_user
alter role exec_all_sp add member nw_user
--check in a client connection
use adworks
select * from Sales.Store
--Msg 229, Level 14, State 5, Line 8
--The SELECT permission was denied on the object 'Store', database 'adworks', schema
'Sales'.
exec Person.sp_DeletePerson_Temporal 2
--(1 row affected)
--(1 row affected)
```

PRACTICE: create a new role as a fusion of the db_datareader and db_datawriter roles, and assign the new user to this role. Test. Database objects belong to a schema and the schema has a single owner (different from being a member of the db_owner database role). The owner can DROP the schema and create or drop objects in the schema. Privileges are normally controlled at the schema/role level and not at the individual user/table level. How to check which principals are in which roles?

```sql
select DP1.name as DatabaseRoleName, isnull (DP2.name, 'No members') as
DatabaseUserName
from sys.database_role_members as DRM right outer join
sys.database_principals as DP1 on DRM.role_principal_id = DP1.principal_id left outer
join sys.database_principals as DP2 on DRM.member_principal_id = DP2.principal_id
where DP1.type = 'R' --R: database role
order by DP1.name
```

Designing schemas and the associated roles and privileges for an application is an important part of relational modeling. Example: AdventureWorks database. PRACTICE: design the schemas, roles and privileges for a big national library like OSzK

## Data security in SQL Server

Sensitive data In SQL Server 2017, fields can be classified automatically or manually w.r.t. info type (e.g. ‘Personal’) and sensitivity level (e.g. ‘Confidential-GDPR’).

```sql
Use the database Tasks -> Classify data tool. You can save the accepted recommendations. We can
also use the Extended Properties catalog view called sys.extended_properties to query this
information. This is what a sensitivity report looks like:
```

You can also run an automatic vulnerability analysis:

## Areas of data security

- Secure client connections -> SSL. A certificate to be used by the server must be installed.

- Database files and backup files (data at rest)

  - File level: backup encryption and transparent data encryption (TDE) that applies encryption to the data files as well

  - Field level: we can hide sensitive columns even from sysadmins (“always encrypted”), by using encryption and decryption in the clients

Data being used by the server (data in motion)

  - Dynamic data masking: hide parts of sensitive columns via a mask defined in the schema e.g. ALTER COLUMN [Social Security Number] <data type> MASKED WITH (FUNCTION = 'partial(0,"XXX-XX-",4)')—show only the last 4 digits, and apply the XX pattern for the rest. Users with the UNMASK privilege can read the original value57.

The recommended best practice is to apply field level protection to those fields classified as sensitive. DEMO: masking

```sql
use northwind
--alter table employees drop column SSN
--alter table employees drop column email
alter table employees add ssn char(10) null, email varchar(200) --sensitive columns
alter table employees alter column ssn char(10) masked with (function =
'partial(1,".....",4)')
alter table employees alter column email char(200) masked with (function = 'email()')
go
update Employees set ssn ='1234567890'
update Employees set email ='sohase_mondd@citromail.hu'
select lastname, ssn, email from Employees --we can see all values
--however, if we create a read-write user
use master
create login test with password='h6twqPNO', default_database=northwind
go
use northwind --context switch
create user test for login test
alter role db_datareader add member test
alter role db_datawriter add member test
go
--switch to a connection of the test user
execute as user = 'test'
select lastname, ssn, email from Employees
revert
go
--this is what we see:
lastname
ssn
email
Davolio
1.....7890
sXXX@XXXX.com
Fuller
1.....7890
sXXX@XXXX.com
--we now give UNMASK privilege to test
grant UNMASK to test
go
execute as user = 'test'
select lastname, ssn, email from Employees
revert
```

https://www.sqlshack.com/using-dynamic-data-masking-in-sql-server-2016-to-protect-sensitive-data/

```sql
go
--this is what we see:
lastname
ssn
Davolio
1234567890
Fuller
1234567890
```

email sohase_mondd@citromail.hu sohase_mondd@citromail.hu

```sql
--WARNING: the user can still modify the columns!!!
go
execute as user = 'test'
update Employees set email ='mondj_igent@citromail.hu'
select lastname, ssn, email from Employees
revert
go
revoke UNMASK from test
```

PRACTICE: try the default() and random() AdventureworksDW2019.dbo.DimCustomer table.

masking

functions

on

the

## Configuring SSL

- create a new self-signed certificate with the certreq -new -f certparam.inf local.cer command, using the inf file to set the parameters

```sql
use the mms console All tasks -> Manage private keys to add the MSSQL$PRIM user as a user
with full control of the private key of the certificate
```

- in SS Config Manager use Protocols -> Properties to set the Enforce encryption option and restart the service

- in SSMS type select * from sys.dm_exec_connections and check the fields: encrypt_option=TRUE -> SSL, auth_scheme=SQL (the latter meaning SQL Server authentication)

## Backup encryption

A Service Master Key (SMK) is created automatically when the instance is installed. In order to encrypt database backups, we need a Master Key that will be stored in the master database encrypted with the password specified and another copy encrypted with the SMK to enable automated use. This MK will be used to encrypt the private keys for the certificates created for database backups.58 DEMO: We create a master key:

```sql
use master
CREATE MASTER KEY ENCRYPTION BY PASSWORD = 'h6twqPNO'
go
--create a backup of the new MK
OPEN MASTER KEY DECRYPTION BY PASSWORD = 'h6twqPNO'
go
--we use another password for the backup
BACKUP MASTER KEY TO FILE = 'C:\install\exportedmasterkey'
ENCRYPTION BY PASSWORD = 'h6twqPNOh6twqPNO'
go
--we create a private-public key pair and a self-signed certificate
CREATE CERTIFICATE backup_cert_master
--this will be encrypted with the MK
WITH SUBJECT = 'NW DB backup',
EXPIRY_DATE = '20301031'
--it is wise to create a backup of it for disaster
```

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/backup-restore/backup-encryption?view=sqlserver-2017

BACKUP CERTIFICATE backup_cert_master TO FILE = 'C:\install\exportedcert'

```sql
--you can restore it by CREATE CERTIFICATE …
--we back up the database
BACKUP DATABASE northwind TO DISK = 'C:\install\nw_enc.bak'
WITH COMPRESSION, ENCRYPTION (
ALGORITHM = AES_256,
SERVER CERTIFICATE = backup_cert_master
), STATS = 10
GO
```

Try to restore the encrypted backup set to a new database on PRIM. The backup will be decrypted automatically using the backup_cert_master. Then try to do the same on SECOND. The contents of the backup will be unreadable. PRACTICE: use the master key to back up the test database. Try to restore it on the THIRD server.

## Always encrypted

The encryption/decryption occurs in the client and the keys are stored outside the server instance (either locally in the Windows certificate store or in Azure Key Vault). DEMO: we add Always Encrypted to the Address column of the Employees table. 1. Select Northwind -> Tables -> Employees -> Encrypt columns and select the Address field 2. Choose Randomized type. This means that grouping, filter by equality, and joining tables on encrypted columns will not be possible on the server, but an ECB59 type attack against the column is prevented 3. Choose to generated a new column key 4. Accept that the collation will be changed to binary 5. On the next pane, select the Windows certificate store. This is outside the SQL server instance so the SQL server administrator in the sysadmin server role will have no access to it. 6. Check the new certificate in the certmgr.msc mmc application:

8. If you want to see the decrypted results, open a new connection and in the Options, select Additional Connection Parameters and type “Column Encryption Setting = Enabled”. 9. When you run a query, you should enable parameterization in order to support inserts, updates or filtering of encrypted columns. PRACTICE: select the Deterministic encryption type for the Title column and verify that the same ciphertext will be generated for the same plaintext, making an ECB attack possible.

https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/Electronic-Code-Book
