# 6. Database Migration

Database migration means the changing of the database technology in an information system. The complexity of the problem depends on the level of the change:

- Same main technology, same vendor, different version. Example: Postgres 8 -> 17

- Same main technology, different vendor. Example: Postgres 17 -> MS SQL Server 2019

- Different main technology i.e. relational, graph, document store, key-value store. Example: Postgres -> Firestore

## Migration between relational technologies

Relational->relational migration can be performed by import/export functions or by manually editing a dump created from the source database, but in several cases only a specialized tool or custom dedicated software can solve the problem. Typical issues:

- Data types

- Differences in SQL DDL/DML syntax

- Differences in the authentication models

- Any server side logic, like stored procedures, must be re-implemented

In this demo, we migrate the SQL Server Northwind database to Postgres. Install Postgres and pgAdmin, then run the pg_script.sql script in the database postgres. The contents of the script is as follows. 1. Creates the Products, Orders, Order details, Customers tables and inserts data 2. Creates a new stored function that supports the creation of a new order 3. Creates a new view that lists the last 5 orders’ properties Notes: The script was manually edited based on a dump script generated by SSMS20. An example for two dialects of a default constraint:

- Postgres: ALTER TABLE products ALTER COLUMN Unitprice SET DEFAULT 0

- SQL Server: ALTER TABLE products ADD CONSTRAINT DF_Products_UnitPrice DEFAULT ((0)) FOR UnitPrice

Another example for the Boolean type: SQL Server accepts a 0/1, while Postgres does not. The script contains a stored function that implements a transaction. The atomicity of this transaction is an important business rule that must be observed.

## Migration from relational to document store

Data models: relational vs document store The relational data model is determined by the domain model and it is normalized in 3NF. The relational model is universal, any query can be run efficiently. The model can be tuned to a certain application via indexes.

More on this problem: https://severalnines.com/database-blog/migrating-mssql-postgresql-what-youshould-know

With noSQL models like document stores and key-value stores, the proper and efficient data model can be determined only with respect to the planned application and the expected queries. For this reason, while a relational model can be migrated quite smoothly into another relational technology, there is no easy or automated solution for migrating a relational model into a noSQL model. Migration is particularly cumbersome for relational models with complex relational structures among the tables. While hierarchical one-to-many relations map easily to noSQL structures, individual considerations are required to implement many-to-many relations. The structure is to be planned manually, and a custom application must be implemented to manage the data loading process.

## The demo application

A simple python Flask application will be used to demonstrate the migration process. The app uses the Orders, Order details, Products and Customers tables of the Northwind database. The functionality is as follows.

- The user can select a product from a dropdown list, specify a quantity and post an order in the Northwind database. The returned page confirms the order and lists the last 5 orders.

- The app returns an error message if the stock of the product or the balance of the customer is too low.

- The placement of the order is run in a transaction.

## Running the demo app on localhost with a Postgres backend

Perform the following steps: 1. (already done on the VM) Install Anaconda python: https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual 2. (already done on the VM) Create a virtual environment for the project21: a. Anaconda admin prompt: set https_proxy=http://proxy.uni-pannon.hu:3128 b. http://proxy.mik.uni-pannon.hu c. (otherwise you’ll receive ‘SSL: WRONG_VERSION_NUMBER’) d. conda create -n flask_demo pip //python=3.8.5 (pip is added as a dependency) python version: python –version //3.9.11 available virtual environments: conda env list) e. conda activate flask_demo (later we’ll install the necessary packages into the flask_demo environment) f. pip install flask g. pip install psycopg2

3. download the northwind.py app, and cd to the folder of your flask project (i.e. the directory named ‘flask’)

https://blog.usejournal.com/why-and-how-to-make-a-requirements-txt-f329c685181e

4. start the Anaconda Spyder python editor and set the password to … and the port to 5432 in line 59. Review the app. Note that the ‘with connection:’ block runs the calling of the new_order() function in a transaction. 5. At the conda prompt: set FLASK_APP=northwind.py (by setting set DEBUG=1 you won’t need to manually restart the web server every time). Note: we’ll use main.py as app name on the GCP so that no specific setting should be necessary. 6. flask run

Technologies used: a. The templates folder holds the html pages which are processed by the jinja template engine. The python variables are available in the HTML templates {% for ... in / if …else / with / block, extends %}, and the templates can be bested with the ‘block’22. b. Bootstrap (formatting) 8. Could be made better or more secure, but this is not our focus now23.

## Document stores: Cloud Firestore overview

We’re going to migrate this app to Google Cloud Firestore. Google Cloud Firestore is a document store. It supports the storage of multiple document collections. It is the new edition of the previous Realtime Database that used a single monolithic json24. Features of Cloud Firestore:

- „Firestore database=Collections of documents”.

- Every document is essentially a json record e.g. name : first : "Joe" last : "Long" born : 1995

- The collection has no schema i.e. it may store documents of arbitrary structure in the same collection. Nevertheless, even if there is no schema validation upon insertion, any realistic application reading the collection expects a certain schema—’schema-on-read’ system. This is in contrast to the ’schema-on-write’ approach of relational databases i.e. writes that do not follow the schema are not permitted.

- Every document must have a unique key, which can be auto-generated, but it cannot be a number.

- Collections cannot be nested. However, a document may hold a sub-collection attached to it in a coll-doc-coll-doc-coll-… etc. hierarchy with a maximal depth of 100.

- Special document data types: 1-D array, map (associative array), reference type. A reference is a path string leading to a document, e.g. a reference pointing to a document in a hierarchy. It may take the form coll_id/doc_id/coll_id/… etc. A possible problem with sub-collections is that they can survive in an 'orphaned' state even if the parent collection is deleted.

- One-to-many relations can be implemented by embedding, many-to-many collections can be implemented by embedding combined with references.

Flask app: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwZwr5Tvyxo HTML Templates https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QnDWIZuWYW0 WTF Forms https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UIJKdCIEXUQ Database ORM https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYWiDiIUxQc For a comparison see: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/rtdb-vs-firestore#key_considerations

- Firestore supports real time concurrent updates and atomic transactions. Queries are implemented via filters.

- A Realtime/snapshot listener generates an event when a document changes, and an application can subscribe to the event by a callback function25 .

More on best practices: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/best-practices

## Designing, creating and loading our Firestore document store

We must remodel the data, which is an application specific process. Our planned queries:

- Listing products and customers

- Submitting a new order with a single item

- Listing the last 5 order items along with order detail and customer data

Considering these queries, we’ll design 3 collections: a flat Products, a flat Customer and a hierarchical Orders->Orderitems collection. Note that this would not suit a query about what was ordered and when, but such a query is not (yet) part of our application. Alternatively, we could nest the Orders->Orderitems collection into the Customers collection. However, this would make it difficult to query e.g. a time-ordered list of the orders, as the querying of sub-collections is normally not allowed without iterating the parent document collection. Other considerations:

- We’ll use automatic document ID’s

- We’ll order the orders with respect to date to support the listing of the last 5 items

- The CustomerID will be indexed automatically

The migration process has 2 main steps: 1. Implementing the new database and transforming/loading data 2. Re-implementing the client application to work with the new database Implementing the new database and transforming/loading data We’ll programmatically create and load the document store by reading from the Postgres database running on localhost and writing to the document store in the cloud. We must create a GCP service account to access the Firebase store from our desktop machine26. 1. Open the Firebase console: https://console.firebase.google.com/ a. After Google authentication, create a new project b. We need neither Gemini nor Google analytics in this project c. Go to https://console.firebase.google.com/u/0/project/[Your project ID]/firestore and create a database. You can try to manually add/delete/edit collections and documents either here or at the GCP GUI-n. d. Create a collection called books with two book documents

https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/query-data/listen We would need no service account to access the store from an app within our GCP project, but it is much easier and faster to develop and debug an app locally and then deploy it to GCP if needed. See also: https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/access/create-enable-service-accounts-for-instances

e. Go to Firebase console -> cogwheel icon -> Service accounts -> Create service account -> Generate new private key. Here we can generate a json file that contains the token of the key of the automatically created service account. Save this file to a secure place because it allows access to the database. f.

You can also find here a python code snippet for the connection.

2. (already done on the VM) At the conda prompt, switch to the virtual environment and type: pip install firebase_admin

a. Check that the Postgres service is up and the Northwind tables are available b. Make sure that the proxy is switched OFF on the VM c. Review and run the python main.py script in the flask_gcp_firestore folder that loads the 3 collections. This time you need no Flask web application, so you can start the script from the conda prompt by typing: python main.py27 d. Check the contents of the collections at the Firebase console. PRACTICE: Review and run the new northwind.py web app that implements the order processing transaction using the Firestore database.

- Manually delete the demo order that was inserted by the main.py

- Implement the missing list_orders() function that returns a summary row for each order item of the last 5 orders. The result is rendered by the order_list.html template. The functionality that we must reproduce is as follows:

```sql
select o.orderdate::timestamp(0) without time zone as orderdate,
c.companyname, c.country, c.balance, p.productname, od.quantity,
od.quantity * od.unitprice as value, p.unitsinstock
from products p join orderdetails od on p.productid=od.productid
join orders o on o.orderid=od.orderid
join customers c on c.customerid=o.customerid
order by orderdate desc limit 5;
```

- You can use the same Html templates.

- Test the web app on http://localhost:5000/

More info on developing for Firestore:

- Firestore programming reference: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/managedata/add-data

- https://medium.com/google-cloud/firebase-developing-an-app-engine-service-withpython-and-cloud-firestore-1640f92e14f4

- https://towardsdatascience.com/nosql-on-the-cloud-with-python-55a1383752fc

Creating a Firestore service:

- https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/quickstart#python_1

If you receive an authentication error, this is probably due to the incorrect system time setting of the virtual machine. In the date and time setting system panel, change the system time to manual and then back to automatic to refresh the time.

The table below shows a comparison of tools to enforce data integrity: Postgres

Firestore

Schema is enforced in all DML operations: ‘schema on write’

Each document in a collection may have different attributes (fields): ‘schema on read’

Rich set of data types and user defined data types (like enumeration types)

Very limited set of data types e.g. no money or decimal type

Primary keys and foreign keys

The ID of a collection must be unique and can be automatically generated (like a serial type) but it cannot be a number. Foreign keys can be stored as attributes and enforced by security rules.

Unique constraints and check constraints

Security rules28

ACID transactional safety is supported

Transactions can be started from the client to prevent test-and-set type errors and atomicity is preserved by batched writes29, but transactions cannot be combined with batched writes (see later).

## Transactions on Firestore vs Postgres

DEMO: Test the atomicity of the order transaction on Postgres. On the PgAdmin console, inject an error in the new_order() function by replacing the statement:

```sql
insert into orders (orderid, customerid) values (var_orderid, var_custid);
with this statement
insert into orders (orderid, customerid) values (var_orderid, ‘ERROR’);
This will violate the foreign key constraint and result in a runtime error at the next invocation. Using
the web app, place a new order and verify that after the error the balance of the customer is restored
to the original value, even though it has already been decreased before the insert statement. The
transaction has been rolled back automatically.
```

DEMO: Logical errors on Firestore in a concurrent environment

- Add a delay of 10 seconds after the checking of the stock and the balance (import time and time.sleep(10))

- Set the balance of all 3 customers to 10000 and the stock of the Chai product to 3 manually on the Cloud Firestore web console

a client side app that uses the Firebase Admin SDKs runs with administrative privileges and bypasses the security rules defined for the Firestore db. We could only demonstrate security rules by a mobile client. Therefore, rules are not detailed in this text. For more information, see https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/security/get-started https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/manage-data/transactions#python_1

- Start the app in 3 browser windows and order 2 units of Chai for each customer (value: 2*18=36). We expect that only one order of the three can be successful due to the limited stock.

- Verify that all 3 orders are processed with SUCCESS, all 3 customers are charged 36, and the new stock value is 1. We can see that without transactional control, serious logical errors can occur.

## Using a Firestore transaction

A Firestore transaction may contain read operations followed by write operations. If a transaction reads a document and then the document is modified by another client before commit, the transaction is rolled back and re-run automatically (retried 5 times). However, the atomicity of the transaction is not ensured. Example: # create a new customer called test manually and set its balance to 9 # then run this script in two parallel sessions import firebase_admin from firebase_admin import credentials from firebase_admin import firestore import time cred = credentials.Certificate("token.json") firebase_admin.initialize_app(cred) db = firestore.client() transaction = db.transaction() cust_ref = db.collection('customers').document('test') @firestore.transactional def update_in_transaction(transaction, cust_ref): cust_ref_snapshot = cust_ref.get(transaction=transaction) new_balance = cust_ref_snapshot.get('balance') + 1 print("New balance: ", new_balance) time.sleep(10) if (new_balance <= 10): transaction.update(cust_ref, {'balance': new_balance}) print("Balance increased") else: print("Balance already maximal") update_in_transaction(transaction, cust_ref)

Set the balance of the test customer to 9 manually and run the above script from two concurrent sessions. Though we receive the ‘Balance increased’ message from both sessions, the final balance will be 10 (and not 11) because one of the transactions (the one that also returned the ‘Balance already maximal’ message) was rolled back and re-run again. Therefore, we were able to enforce the business rule that the balance cannot exceed 10, not even in a concurrent scenario. PRACTICE: Using the above code snippet as a template, add transactional control to the order_proc function in the Firestore-based python Flask application and test its correct operation in the scenario described in the Concurrency demo section. We expect that among several concurrent transactions, only one will run successfully, and the consistency of the database will be preserved. This means that after the end of all transactions, the stock will be correct, only one order will be accepted and only one customer’s balance will be charged.

## Batched writes

The atomicity of a batch containing multiple ‘doc.set’, ‘update’ or ‘delete’ operations can be enforced by the db.batch() object. Note that this solution does not provide a protection against external updates on documents already read by the client and thus it cannot prevent ‘test-and-set’ type logical errors30. It is not possible to nest batched writes within a transaction. Therefore, we must decide whether to ensure Atomicity or Isolation of the ACID requirements. Transactions only work online i.e. they require a connection with the server, but batched writes can work offline as well. DEMO: review and test the batched version (northwind_batch_write.py) of the demo app by injecting a runtime error, e.g. print (1/0), between two writes. Some more Firestore limits:

- A transaction or batch of writes can write to a maximum of 500 documents

- Read operations (get()) must precede write operations (set(), update())

- „In security rules for transactions or batched writes, there is a limit of 20 document access calls for the entire atomic operation in addition to the normal 10 call limit for each single document operation in the batch.”

- etc. …

As a general conclusion we can state that with NoSQL technologies the client (or the business logic layer) must support and implement all low level data processing operations, like joining collections etc. Transaction control and data integrity enforcement are also less robust compared to relational database technologies. Therefore, NoSQL technologies can be recommended for relatively simple business domains and processes. An example is a blogger website.

## Other Firestore features of interest not detailed here

- real time updates

- offline data persistence

- integration with cloud services

Cf. “Firestore allows you to run sophisticated ACID transactions against your document data.” https://cloud.google.com/firestore
