# 7. Cloud Database Technologies

## Overview

Cloud providers such as Amazon, Google, IBM, Microsoft offer database management on a SaaS or PaaS basis. The viability of such a solution instead of running private database servers depends on economical and, to some extent, technical considerations. Some of these: ✓ Cloud services offer high availability (better than the corporate servers) with a geographically distributed infrastructure. ✓ Cloud services offer automated on-demand scalability with flexible, at least in part loaddependent, billing schemes. ✓ The cloud offers several other in-cloud services like data analysis, image processing, NLP, etc. which can access the cloud database and which can be integrated in a solution.  The functionality offered by the cloud database services is typically inferior to the private servers, though some functions may be replaced by other means.  Though some costs are proportional with the usage, there are also fixed costs to be paid for e.g. data storage. All such costs should be considered in the business plan of the planned service or solution.  Data security may be compromised if highly sensitive data (like personal healthcare records) physically leave the company network. Incidents or serious data loss may also occur31.  Critical services, like production system control should not depend on Internet access. These latter two concerns can be alleviated in a private cloud32.

## Starting a new GCP project

In this project we’ll use the App engine to run our Flask app, a cloud SQL database and a Firestore document store. 1. Start a private browser and enable pop-up windows 2. Activate your $50 coupon using your university email address, observing the instructions you received in the Neptun message 3. Log in to https://console.cloud.google.com 4. Start a new project or delete existing: IAM & Admin -> Manage resources 5. You must specify a unique project name, which will be referred to as YOUR-PROJECT-ID in this manual. Check the billing account linked to the project. It should have $50 credit at startup. 6. On the Firestore page set: SELECT NATIVE MODE, then CREATE DATABASE. Only a single Firestore database is allowed in a GCP project.

## Migrating the Postgres database to GCP

1. GCP Databases->SQL->Create instance -> PostgreSQL (you must enable the Compute Engine API) 2. Choose an instance id and password. This is the name of the database server instance, not the name of the database or the database user. Set:

https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/article/2024/may/09/unisuper-google-cloud-issue-accountaccess E.g. https://www.openstack.org/

region: Europe, PostgreSQL version 13, single zone (no failover), customize your instance: public IP enabled 3. connections: „All apps in this project are authorized by default”, however, we plan to access the database from the Internet by PgAdmin, so we allow any IP address (=pg_hba.conf entry). Add network: 0.0.0.0/0. Save. 4. In Advanced options, enable Query insights. 5. Wait while the instance is being created and then change the password of the Postgres user. Navigate to SQL Overview to find the public IP address of the server. 6. In PgAdmin connect to the cloud instance using the public IP address, then review and run the dump file pg_script.sql. 7. Change the IP in the python app to the public GCP IP and test the app. It should works just as with the local server. Check that the new orders appear in the Postgres tables. 8. Returning to GCP, open Query insights and check the execution plan of the query SELECT * FROM last_orders. Note that it may take up to 10 minutes for a query to appear in the Query insights statistics, which is an offline analysis tool.

Implementing the demo app on GCP33 -> Cloud programming MSc course We’ll deploy the app to the GCP app engine34. 1. (already done on the VM) Install the Cloud SDK and the gcloud CLI on your desktop computer https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install 2. Open a cmd terminal as Windows Administrator, cd to the flask_gcp directory, and set HTTPS_PROXY=http://proxy.uni-pannon.hu:3128 3. at the prompt type: gcloud init (requires authentication to our personal google profile) and

```sql
select YOUR-PROJECT-ID
4. The SDK does not contain the App engine extension, so this must be installed separately. At
the Google Cloud SDK shell prompt type: gcloud components install app-engine-python
This will take some minutes.
5. gcloud config set project YOUR-PROJECT-ID
```

6. //check billing: gcloud beta billing accounts list 7. In the northwind.py script change the database connection parameters to the public GCP IP address, and save it as main.py. (Update the requirements.txt file.) 8. We’ll use the Cloud Build API to create the container that runs the app, so this API must be enabled in the project: gcloud services enable cloudbuild.googleapis.com 9. Initialize the app engine in the project: gcloud app create --project=YOUR-PROJECT-ID 10. gcloud app deploy You’ll receive target URL on which you can access the application. You can also start a browser for the app by: gcloud app browse 11. You can review runtime error messages on the web based GCP console App engine -> Services -> Diagnose : Logs

If you are already familiar with cloud programming concepts, you can skip this section and go on with the app running on localhost https://medium.com/@dmahugh_70618/deploying-a-flask-app-to-google-app-engine-faa883b5ffab

PRACTICE: improve the GCP app by displaying also the cause of an eventual error i.e. either low balance or low stock, see below. This requires a slight modification of the new_order() stored procedure as well as the client Html templates. Deploy the modified app by typing gcloud app deploy

EVEN MORE PRACTICE: Split the table above in two tables that show the last 5 orders and the balance of the customers involved separately. Before you go… 1. Stop the app: App engine -> Settings -> Disable application 2. Stop the Postgres server: SQL -> Overview -> STOP 3. Shut down the GCP project

## BigQuery overview and demo

“BigQuery is designed to query structured and semi-structured data using standard SQL”35 BigQuery was designed to run read-only OLAP-like queries on denormalized (flattened) data warehouse tables for decision support and business analysis. The native storage model is a compressed (and optionally partitioned) column store (called Dremel)36. All data is stored in encrypted form. BigQuery can also run queries directly on other data sources like Bigtable, Cloud storage or Google drive as well. For best performance, the data from such external sources should be first imported into the Dremel column store. The logical data model is a Dataset that contains related tables with a fixed schema and typed fields, referenced like project.dataset.table

## Mining the Northwind database

In this demo, we

```sql
use the SQL Server version of Northwind
```

- create a denormalized view and export it to csv

- load the csv to a BigQuery table

https://panoply.io/data-warehouse-guide/bigquery-architecture/

https://medium.com/google-cloud/bigquery-explained-storage-overview-70cac32251fa

```sql
use the table to create a linear regression BigQueryML model
```

- assess the accuracy of the model

Steps: 1. Create a view that contains the value of the order items with the following fields: value_numeric, country, categoryid, p_unitprice, discount, pyear 2. Export the view to a csv file 3. Using a Chrome browser, create a new project: GCP main menu -> IAM&admin -> Manage resources 4. GCP main menu -> Analytics -> BigQuery, Enable API 5. From the “…” menu of the project -> Create dataset, choosing the Multi-region called ‘US (multiple regions in the US)’. You must specify an ID. Name the dataset ‘northwind’. The dataset will be stored in encrypted form. Go to dataset. 6. Select the + create table, and specify Create table from upload -> schema auto-detect. Load the denormalized table and check the data types. Name the table ‘nw’. Money type may be a problem. Go to table. 7. Review the schema and the preview data 8. It is a good idea to check the validity and contents of the source data before an analysis. Analytics -> Dataplex is a GCP service that supports this. a. From Dataplex, or straight from the BigQuery Studio (last tab next to the Schema tab), create and start an on-demand Profile task by clicking Quick data profile -> Details. This task will run in the background for ca. 5 minutes, then display the column statistics and histograms. b. Also, start a Data quality scan with a manually added quality rule (e.g. Freight >=0). You can also review and accept the ‘de facto’ rules based on the outcome of the profile task, e.g. the rule inferred for the Freight filed is “min: 0.02, max:1007.64”. The administrative info related to the scan can be stored in the Northwind dataset. The results are accessible by clicking on the scan name on the Dataplex -> Data quality page, and selecting the Jobs history tab. 9. In BigQuery, SQL queries can be run in the console. Compose new query -> SQL console window 10. Create the model that predicts the value_numeric field from the country, categoryid, p_unitprice, discount, pyear fields using the following SQL statement (if you named the dataset ‘Northwind’ and the table ‘nw’):

CREATE MODEL `northwind.nw_model` OPTIONS (model_type='linear_reg', input_label_cols=['valu e_numeric']) AS

```sql
SELECT value_numeric, country, categoryid, p_unitprice, discount, pyear -–if
the
select
list
does
not
contain
the
class
label,
you
get
the
error
message
’Unable to identify the label column’
FROM `northwind.nw`
WHERE value_numeric is not null
```

the Evaluation. You can see that the data set was split automatically for a training table (1702 records) and an evaluation table (453 records). The mean absolute error is 301. 12. We can evaluate the model using the full data set (though is not a recommended best practice in data science and we do it only for demonstrating the EVALUATE method). You can use the following command. SELECT * FROM ML.EVALUATE(MODEL `northwind.nw_model`, (

```sql
SELECT value_numeric, country, categoryid, p_unitprice, discount, pyear
FROM `northwind.nw`
))
```

so the performance of the model is poor: the connection between the dependent variable and the independent variables is weak. If we re-create the model with the CALCULATE_P_VALUES = true, CATEGORY_ENCODING_METHOD='DUMMY_ENCODING' options, we should also see whether the contribution of each variable to the model is significant38. We can also query those records where the error was less than 40% using the following command. Similarly, we’ll find that the worst prediction was 517.9 instead of 17.0.

```sql
SELECT * FROM ML.PREDICT(MODEL `northwind.nw_model`, (
SELECT value_numeric, country, categoryid, p_unitprice, discount, pyear
FROM `northwind.nw`
)) where abs((predicted_value_numeric-value_numeric))/value_numeric<0.4
```

PRACTICE: Modify the view to include a value_nominal field that has three categories for the lowprice, middle-price and the high-price items. Try to predict the value_nominal field using the 'BOOSTED_TREE_CLASSIFIER' or the ‘LOGISTIC_REG' methods. In how many cases/which percentage can you predict the class label correctly? Some help:

```sql
select od.unitprice*od.quantity*(1-od.discount) value,
case when (od.unitprice*od.quantity*(1-od.discount)) < 200 then 'L'
when (od.unitprice*od.quantity*(1-od.discount)) < 1200 then 'M'
when (od.unitprice*od.quantity*(1-od.discount)) >= 1200 then 'H'
else 'N/A' end value_nominal,
c.CustomerID, c.CompanyName, c.Country, c.Balance, o.OrderID, o.OrderDate, o.RequiredDate,
year(o.orderdate) pyear,
o.ShippedDate, o.ShipVia, o.Freight, o.ShipName, o.ShipAddress, o.ShipCity, o.ShipRegion,
o.ShipPostalCode, o.ShipCountry, od.UnitPrice, od.Quantity, od.Discount,
p.ProductName, p.SupplierID, p.CategoryID,
p.QuantityPerUnit, p.UnitPrice p_unitprice, p.UnitsInStock, p.UnitsOnOrder, p.ReorderLevel,
p.Discontinued
from Customers AS c join Orders AS o ON c.CustomerID = o.CustomerID join
[Order Details] AS od ON o.OrderID = od.OrderID join
```

https://cloud.google.com/bigquery-ml/docs/reference/standard-sql/bigqueryml-syntax-create However, this feature does not seem to work

Products AS p ON od.ProductID = p.ProductID

PRACTICE: Use the public bigquery-public-data.samples.natality39 test table to predict the weight of a baby using linear regression. This table contains many records, so you can sample the record set with a WHERE RAND() < 0.0001 clause. Some help:

- If your dataset was not created in the US, create a new dataset in the Multi-region called ‘US (multiple regions in the US)’ with the name us_dataset and then run the query below. This way you’ll not need to set the region of the query manually (in the MORE -> Query settings -> Advanced options)

CREATE MODEL `us_dataset.natality_model` OPTIONS (model_type='linear_reg', input_label_cols=['weight_pounds']) AS SELECT weight_pounds, is_male, gestation_weeks, mother_age, CAST(mother_race AS string) AS mother_race FROM `bigquery-public-data.samples.natality` WHERE weight_pounds IS NOT NULL AND RAND() < 0.0001

SELECT

* FROM

ML.TRAINING_INFO(MODEL `dataset_nev.natality_model`)

```sql
SELECT * FROM ML.PREDICT(MODEL `dataset_nev.natality_model`,
(select true as is_male, 40 as gestation_weeks, 30 as mother_age,'38' as mother_race))
```

## Further reading

- Faculty training https://edu.google.com/programs/faculty/training

- Learning paths https://cloud.google.com/training

- Quickstarts , Short tutorials to help you get started with Cloud Platform products, services, and APIs https://cloud.google.com/gcp/getting-started Sample Projects https://go.google-mkto.com/CPI00b01C3FT0A2j1tciC0V

- GCP docs https://cloud.google.com/docs

https://cloud.google.com/bigquery-ml/docs/bigqueryml-natality
