# 9. In-Memory Tables in SQL Server

In-memory tables, a.k.a. memory optimized tables (MOT), combined with natively compiled stored logic is the Formula-1 of the OLTP relational database technology50, which was enabled by memory getting cheaper. Features:

- Concurrent data processing methods, refined in-memory data structures, hash indexes and a separate, dedicated in-memory database engine -> high performance.

  - For every MOT table structure or natively compiled procedure, a new dll is created

  - To avoid locks, row versioning is used i.e. when a row is updated, another version of the row is created (=automatic snapshot isolation). Deletes are also logical, deleted rows are preserved until all transactions that could use that version have committed

- Full ACID support. Durability is ensured, all changes are written to the non-volatile (disk based) transaction log

- MOT’s can also be made non-durable for storing transient data as an alternative to tempdb tables. Changes to data in such tables do not involve any disk I/O. A further advantage is that the structure of the table will be preserved, unlike that of a temporary table. Non-durable MOTs can be used as a memory cache.

- MOT’s can reside in the same database with traditional tables

- If a stored procedure is not natively compiled and it uses a MOT, it must run in interpreted mode (note that the MOT is managed by another engine)51

Requirements and limitations52:

- Only hash or non-clustered BTree indexes are supported

- There must be enough memory for

  - The MOT and its indexes

  - Row versioning

  - Table variables and incremental growth

A rule of thumb is “to start with two times the expected size of memory-optimized tables and indexes” 53

- A MOT cannot be accessed from another database (no cross-database queries or transactions allowed) and cannot be partitioned

- Page and row compression and DDL triggers are not supported

- Only transactional replication is supported with a MOT as subscriber

- DDL (CREATE/ALTER/DROP) is not supported inside transactions

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/overview-and-usagescenarios?view=sql-server-ver16 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/a-guide-to-query-processingfor-memory-optimized-tables https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/unsupported-sql-serverfeatures-for-in-memory-oltp?view=sql-server-ver16 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/estimate-memoryrequirements-for-memory-optimized-tables?view=sql-server-ver16

- Natively compiled stored procedures can only reference memory-optimized tables

- Identity primary keys

Recommended fields of application:

- High performance transaction processing, e.g. support for a large number of concurrent, lowlatency stock exchange transactions. The implementation uses memory optimized transactional tables and the business logic is implemented as natively compiled stored procedures. Especially those procedures in which CPU time dominates will benefit from native compilation.

- Real-time data acquisition and data transform from many sources, e.g. IoT sensors. If the size of the table is to be limited, a job should be used to replace data from the in-memory table to a disk-based column store. If there are many updates, the core table can be a temporal memory-optimized table. The historical records are kept on disk.

- A similar scenario is implementing the Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) process of a data warehouse using non-durable memory-optimized tables as staging tables. Non-durable tables require no disk I/O, which will speed up the ETL process.

- Caching. In this case a non-durable in-memory table is used as a key-value store (blob or json).

- Table types can also be made memory optimized. Such types can be used for table valued parameters of stored procedures.

PRACTICE54 We measure the performance gain of a MOT vs a normal table in a new test database. We compare three scenarios for table inserts: 1. disk-based table and interpreted Transact-SQL 2. memory-optimized table with hash index and interpreted Transact-SQL 3. memory-optimized table with hash index and natively compiled stored procedure

Design migration to In-Memory Migration might be a significant effort. There are built-in tools for OLTP -> In-Memory migration. PRACTICE

- Drop the Northwind database and restore it from the dump

- Database -> Reports -> Standard reports -> Transaction Performance Analysis Overview. This tool presents recommendations for the candidate tables and procedures. Click on the table/proc name for detailed statistics. Already in-memory tables/procs are not included.

- By generating the summary table for all tables, you can check the number of migration blockers. You can see that the worst case is the Customers table with 36 blockers. This is due to an error in the dump that resulted in multiple instances of the same foreign key. Correct the dump.

- Database -> Tasks -> Generate In-Memory OLTP Migration Checklists (does not work)

On the SQL Server 2022 named instance, adding a file to a memory-optimized filegroup fails with the error message ‘Could not process the operation. Always On Availability Groups replica manager is disabled on this instance… etc.’ This is a known issue. We use a default instance of SQL Server 2019 (i.e. NOT a named instance) instead.

- Table name -> Table Memory Optimization Advisor: generates the checklist as a first step. All foreign key constraints from/to the table must be dropped manually before migration and then re-created.

- The Advisor can plan the migration and execute it. The old table will be kept and renamed.

PRACTICE In a more realistic scenario, we test the performance of the order processing stored procedure in the Northwind database in parallel sessions. 1. Drop the database and re-create it from a dump, create the sp_new_order() procedure. 2. Set the parameters for testing and run the proc 10000 times in 3 parallel sessions, in read committed isolation, and 100 times in repeatable read. Measure the runtime. 3. Check the Transaction Performance Analysis Overview. The tables recommended for MOT are Products, Orders, Order Details, Territories, and Customers. 4. Migrate the Products, Orders, Order Details, Customers tables: a. Create a new database called Northwind_mot and run the corrected dump script in it b. Delete the foreign key constraints to/from the above tables c. Migrate the tables using the Advisor. Don’t forget to include data in the new table 5. alter database current set memory_optimized_elevate_to_snapshot = on 6. Run the old order proc, test and compare the runtimes 7. Create a natively compiled version of the stored procedure and repeat the tests 8. Explain the results
